Key takeaways
According to the British Chamber of Commerce, Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) countries are projected to become the world’s 4th biggest market by 2030.
In 2022, the APAC region ranked no.1 as the fastest-growing region hiring from global geos, with the Philippines being the second-hottest country to get hired from.
Singapore ranked second among the top countries by the number of organizations hiring, while Thailand positioned itself as the fastest-growing country by the number of workers hired there.
Key considerations for business growth in Southeast Asia
Thanks to a sizeable population (over 650 million people), developed talent pools, and elaborate VC networks, Southeast Asia is one of the most favorable regions for business growth today—not just to hire from but also to reach new customer bases and enter local markets.

For example, Singapore has established itself as a hub for high-growth digital organizations looking to expand or get funded in the region.

Before you dive into this complex market, here are some key factors that may impact how you do business within Southeast Asia.

The high diversity of the region means that each country speaks its own language and operates within a unique legal framework
Localization is crucial in every sense, from legal documentation to adapting your business strategy to the specific country
Successful collaborations rely on building relationships first and meeting with people face-to-face, either virtually or in person
The digital economy is one of the largest in many countries of Southeast Asia, making the region ideal for companies of all sizes and industries, from fintech, e-commerce, and similar industries
Building local partnerships can be key to facilitating business operations and expanding to multiple markets within the region
In some countries, like Singapore, governments offer incentives for businesses to set up a local entity (grants and tax incentives)
In many ASEAN countries, the rise of digital nomads has caused governments to implement new tax-incentivized visa programs and infrastructure to attract remote talent

The benefits of expanding your operations to Southeast Asia
Many countries in Southeast Asia have been experiencing substantial economic growth and are slowly going back to pre-pandemic numbers, especially in terms of decreasing unemployment rates.

With this in mind, we can say the ASEAN countries (Brunei, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, and Vietnam) hold incredible potential for international businesses looking to explore new markets.

Highly skilled, affordable, and active workforce
The APAC region has an abundance of highly skilled workers across industries who are readily available to hire locally. The costs of hiring these workers are also significantly lower for companies based in wealthier economies, such as the US, Australia, or New Zealand, which is why, for example, we’ve seen numerous developers from Malaysia working for foreign companies.

Southeast Asia also has a very young population that stays active for a long time—people don’t retire early and may remain in the workforce even at the age of 70. This means that the local talent pool is available for a longer period of time.

Growing middle class
As a top emerging market today, this region has also seen increased business opportunities thanks to the growing middle-income and higher-income classes. This indicates a growing purchasing power and consumer spending, opening the market to brands that wish to establish a local presence.

Thanks to this relatively new consumer base eager for quality products and innovative solutions, both Asian and Western organizations have already shown strong growth in the region, according to Deel’s expansion experts.

Strategic location
As it’s located at the crossroads of major trade routes, Southeast Asia serves as a gateway to both the Asia-Pacific region and the global market. Its strategic positioning enables easy access to neighboring markets, facilitating trade and establishing a foothold for businesses aiming to expand their reach beyond the region.

Many companies set up in an ASEAN country (likely one with the most business-friendly regulations) to expand to the rest of the market from there. Reaching the world’s biggest economies, like China and India, is also easier when you’re already established within Asia.

Developed remote work infrastructure
says Paul Endacott. In recent years, the Southeast Asia region has become increasingly popular among digital nomads, with many cities in Indonesia, Malaysia, and Vietnam becoming remote work hubs. This propelled countries to invest in infrastructure to support digital nomads and launch remote work visas to facilitate compliance and streamline taxation for foreign workers generating income from Southeast Asian countries.

Expanding into Southeast Asia and hiring from this region enables businesses to leverage infrastructure that supports remote work and flexibility, which helps them build a more productive and efficient workforce.

Navigating legal and compliance challenges in Southeast Asia demands a deep understanding of local laws and a tailored approach to adapt to the evolving regulatory landscape that varies by country.

Visas and global mobility
Moving around Asian countries almost always requires visas. Only a handful of countries offer a visa-free regimen during a certain period, like Singapore and Malaysia, where ASEAN residents can stay for up to 30 days without a visa.

That said, companies that want to ensure competitive advantage through global mobility need to be able to provide visa sponsorship for their employees and provide adequate relocation support for their talent in this region.

Partnerships Manager

Strategy localization
Some companies try to enter the Southeast Asia market by building an overarching strategy, thinking it’ll apply to all countries in the region. And according to our partners at GRIT Search, they fail because this strategy needs to be localized for each individual market.

Entering Singapore, for example, may be straightforward, but growth and investment in the region require understanding the new business environment and adapting your strategy. You’ll most likely need a local partner or a local team to act as a bridge between your organization and this new market.

Additionally, restrictions on foreign direct investment (FDI) in countries like Cambodia or Vietnam require certain types of multinationals (e.g., real estate companies) to have partners and shareholders on the ground to be able to operate.

Language barriers
In most ASEAN countries, English is not the first or second language. In some locations, education levels are not as high as in the West (especially in European countries), so consequently, many people may not have the required language proficiency to work in a global environment.

Additionally, some countries require all employment documentation to be in the local language. That means eight different languages for the entire region, for which you’ll need to hire a legal team to ensure employment contracts and other documents are properly localized and enforceable.

Intellectual property ownership
Due to varying levels of IP protection and enforcement across Southeast Asia, navigating this aspect of business in the region may be difficult. In many locations, companies may experience delays in registrations and weak regime enforcement, which may cause financial losses for businesses operating within the region.

Local governments, for example, in Singapore, are working toward establishing more robust legal measures to allow companies to better protect their intellectual property.

Employer costs and employee benefits across the region
Many countries in the Southeast Asia region are considered to be low-cost when it comes to compensation and employee benefits. The exact percentages (of employee's salary) vary, but you can see some of the estimated employer costs in the table below:

Country	Estimated employer costs
Cambodia	~2.1%
Indonesia	~4.24%
Malaysia	~13-14%
Philippines	~10.57%
Singapore	~17.25%
Vietnam	~23.5%
Thailand	~5%
Mandatory and voluntary employee benefits also depend on the country.

For instance, your employer costs in Indonesia involve death security and work-related accident benefits. Also, just like in the Philippines, Indonesia’s 13th-month salary is considered statutory.

In Vietnam, employers are required to pay the Control Union fee of 2%, while in Thailand, only social security is mandatory.

Employees in Singapore who have worked for three consecutive months can take a 16-week-long maternity leave. In Vietnam, maternity leave can last up to six months, during which the employee receives 100% of their average salary. In Indonesia, pregnant employees can take 1.5 months before childbirth and 1.5 months after childbirth of maternity leave.

In most countries of the region, there are no at-will terminations, and they have to be done at just cause. You can usually terminate an employee based on the following:

Probation period
Objective grounds
Disciplinary dismissal
Performance due to unsuitability for the job
Expiration of the contract
Severance pay is obligatory in countries such as Vietnam and Thailand but not in Singapore.

Competitive pay is a significant factor in talent retention in Southeast Asian countries. You may be more likely to win over a candidate by offering a monetary incentive or higher salary than a competitor—company culture and additional benefits typically come second.
